---
title: "Classical Sanskrit for Everyone errata"
date: 2025-09-23
permalink: /posts/2025/09/errata/

tags: 
  - "announcements"
  - "sanskrit"
---

Corrections to errors and omissions in _[Classical Sanskrit for Everyone: A Guide for Absolute Beginners](https://hackettpublishing.com/classical-sanskrit-for-everyone)_ (Hackett, 2025).

These are organized by topic and page number, with further explanations in cases where it might be helpful.

ततस् and ततः

- Page 125, 8.1 vocabulary, line 3, ततः (_tataḥ_). It should read:  
    ततः | tataḥ | masc. nom. pn. | he

- Page 236, Appendix. It should read:  
    "While it correctly understands nāsti as “there is not,” it fails to appreciate the ablative masculine pronoun tataḥ as referring to the person picked out by yasya and as the one compared to the pious person...." "But it still does not recognize that the ablative nominative tataḥ means “beyond that one” or “more than that one.” “he.”"

- Explanation:
    - ततः / _tataḥ_ is the masculine nominative singular form of _tad_ and found in a _yad-tad_ construction in _Hitopadeśa_ 1.29. With sandhi, ततो / _tato._ It does not mean "therefore," but it refers to the same person that _yasya_ picks out.
    
    - ततस् / _tatas_ is an indeclinable frozen form meaning “thus,” or “therefore,” which is constructed from the pronomial stem _ta_ + _tas_, where -_tas_ is a stem ending. See Whitney's [_Grammar_](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Sanskrit_Grammar_\(Whitney\)/Chapter_XVI).

√अस् and √भू

- Not an error per se, but a clarification: these verbs are typically taken to mean the same thing. They are not like, for example, the verb pair _ser_ and _estar_ in Spanish, which have different meanings.
