---
title: 'New year, new website'
date: 2026-01-01
permalink: /posts/2026/01/new-year
tags:
  - announcements
---

It's a new year, and I have a new website.

A few months ago, I shifted away from Google Sites to WordPress because I was frustrated with the [WYSIWYG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYG) interface. I built my first website in the late nineties using HTML and Geocities, which meant that I could understand why the site looked the way it did and fix things that broke myself. Google Sites, which I moved to at some point years ago, used to let users edit HTML, or at least, that's my memory. But anymore, that's all inaccessible. 

So, I shifted to WordPress.com, hoping I could do a bit more with CSS and the ability to edit templates directly. But it was still a lot of WYSIWYG. And, frankly, the interface feels unnecessarily cluttered and [enshittified](https://www.merriam-webster.com/slang/enshittification). The WordPress team is moving towards integrating AI into multiple levels of the site, too, which I'm not ready to embrace.

All this is to say, I've moved to a static site, hosted by GitHub. This has let me learn a little more about Markdown, Jekyll, and versioning with Git. I used a neat little [script](https://github.com/lonekorean/wordpress-export-to-markdown?tab=readme-ov-file) to convert a Wordpress XML file with my blog posts into some Markdown files. I haven't enabled comments yet, and I'm not sure if I will, since the blog is not heavily trafficked.

It might be overwrought to say it's "resistance" to move to a static site and learn more about coding. But it feels increasingly important to understand basic principles and not offload everything to automated processes.
