---
title: "Academic editing and style"
date: 2026-02-22
permalink: /posts/2026/2/academic-editing/

tags: 
  - "editing"
  - "copyediting"
  - "academic style"
---

Over the last two months, I've begun copyediting for the [APA Blog](https://blog.apaonline.org/), as part of a team of three copyeditors, and I've also begun the last course for my copyediting certificate, offered by [UC San Diego Extended Studies](https://extendedstudies.ucsd.edu/certificates/copyediting). Both experiences have been useful for reflecting on how I make sure my edits don't impinge on an author's style. And yes, there's style in academic writing!

In this post, I'm going to lay out three the things I do when I'm engaged in a *heavy* copyedit, the kind of edit in which I actively revise sentences to remove redundancy, improve clarity, and ensure they still convey the author's ideas. At the APA Blog, in contrast, I'm doing *light* copyedits, only making changes for mechanical errors or genuinely ambiguous sentences. I don't typically suggest or implement changes like the ones I'll talk about below.

(Before I start, I should note that I learned a lot about academic style from Helen Sword's [*Stylish Academic Writing*](https://www.helensword.com/stylish-academic-writing), a book I recommend to academics or academic editors.)

When I'm editing academic writing for clarity and style, I'll typically do three things that are interrelated:

1. Remove unnecessary nominalizations.
2. Revise lengthy strings of prepositions, especially ones that connect abstract nouns.
3. Restructure nested that-clauses.

These three things often come together, as we see in this made-up example: "The nonproduction of perception of the object that is due to the subtlety of that object is that from which false beliefs about the nonexistence of the object arise." 

This sentence essentially means: "Because we don't perceive an object, since it is too small for the naked eye, we falsely believe it doesn't exist."

Now, in an academic context, rewriting the entire sentence in the way I just glossed it may not be an option. That's because sometimes nominalizations like "nonproduction of perception" play a technical role. This is one challenge of academic editing: knowing when to query the author, when to intervene, and when to leave good enough alone! ("It just sounds better to me" is never justification for an edit.)

The example sentence is one I constructed based on an old translation of a text I was reading recently (it's not from any of my clients or colleagues). There, "nonproduction of perception" is a technical term. In philosophical Sanskrit, which loves nominalizations, this would be the subject of the sentence. And so, there could be a reason to preserve this phrase as the subject rather than turning it into a verbal form ("we don't perceive"). The author may wish to emphasize that there is a thing, *nonproduction of perception* that has some causal force. But there may also be versions between the original example and the rewritten sentence that would preserve technical terms and make the sentence clearer for readers. 

(By the way, I'm treating the sentence as an example of academic *writing*. Editing translations involves fidelity to the source material, not just authorial intention, and it involves a whole other set of considerations.)

So, if I'm unsure whether a revision would impact a technical term, I will query the author. That means adding a comment bubble with a request for them to review the edit. Doing that too much is cognitively taxing. But not asking can convey to the author that I, as the editor, am just rewriting without concern for the author's intention.

The ability to edit philosophical and more broadly academic writing is not an academic skillset. It does require the ability to read and understand academic writing, but it also requires explicit knowledge of grammar and style. Still, I've found having an academic background is extremely useful, even when I'm editing material outside of my particular areas of expertise.
